For much of this course,
we've been talking about using
the 30 to 70 console
to access the system,
but there are actually
several ways you can interact
with the mainframe and
they can be as graphical,
text, or API based as you'd like.
After all, the
fundamentals of z/OS are
well-documented and open to
whatever model you want to use.
Let's talk about z/OSMF,
which stands for
the z/OS management facility.
This provides system
management functions in
a task-oriented browser-based
user interface.
The goal of z/ OSMF
is putting as much of
the operating system directly
at your fingertips as possible,
so you can really focus
on what you're
trying to get done.
This includes
streamlining the kinds
of commands we've been
talking about here,
but z/OSMF also has a lot of
new capabilities that are
unique to z/OSMF itself,
z/OSMF is shipped as part
of the operating system,
and it aims to
simplify, optimize,
and modernize z/Os to
the system programmer,
as well as to people
who specialize
in networking, storage, security.
So there's really
something for everyone.
Wait, there's a way to
make all this simple.
Why don't you just
show me that earlier?
Why did I have to learn
all about IODF configs,
system libraries,
JCL and all that?
Well, in many cases,
you still need to know what's
happening behind the scenes.
The goal here is simplification,
assistance, and ScriptAbility.
If there's something
wrong with your JCL,
z/OSMF might not have
a specialized tool to help you.
If your system libraries
aren't set up right,
z/OSMF might not work,
and if you're security
definitions are wrong,
you've got to fix that before
you can jump into z/OSMF.
So knowing what's happening on
the system is
incredibly important.
But once you've gotten
z/OSMF up and running,
you should see if
those task can be
further automated by
what's available now.
It's especially
helpful when you have
a mixed skill workforce because
the experience system programmer
can take a task they know like
the back of their hand and
automate it into what's
called a workflow,
hand that workflow off
to a new mainframer,
and they can guide it
through to completion
without needing to come up with
all of the commands themselves.
Even better, because
the workflow has
already been written and
we all know it works,
it's going to be a whole heck
of a lot more consistent from
run to run than someone typing
out commands for memory.
You don't need me to tell
you that's important.
These workflows
integrate with JCL,
Rexx, Unix, Rest APIs,
and other often used
mainframe utilities because
the first thing
assist Prog will tell
you when you offer to
automate something is,
"I've already got
some JCL Rexx or
a Unix shell script that
basically handles that."
What makes this really
handy is that you can build
a workflow which has a number
of steps and conditions,
and run it from a Rest API,
that really opens up
a whole new set of
possibilities like mobile apps,
Cloud services,
advanced scripting.
Like I said, it's a good
time to be getting into z.
Before we get much further,
let's do a little pop quiz
just to make sure we're
on the same page.
If you knew that
z/OSMF ships as part
of the operating system,
then you're correct.
Since z/OSMF is deeply
integrated into the operating
system, it's just there.
You will have to take
some steps to enable it,
but you don't need to
download or compile z/OSMF.
Okay, enough talking about it.
Let's take a look at
what it looks like.
You login to z/OSMF
from this login screen,
and then we get this screen
which is the z/OSMF desktop,
pretty different from
what you've seen so far.
Major tasks are grouped into
these icons which you can
drag around, arrange
into folders.
All the stuff you would
just expect to be there.
So let's go into
the workflow editor,
and you can see this is where
I build the steps and I
can also set variables
and monitor feedback.
If we explore a little more,
we find dedicated tools
and here are
the things like
SDSF, remember that?
We can see at a glance
how busy the system is,
and we can look at job
and system output,
as well as memory utilization
right down here.
RMF has its own interface,
that's the resource manager.
So we can quickly check on
the common storage activity.
I don't need to
remember commands,
but I do need to
know what I'm doing.
You might have the authority
to enter a command,
and z/OSMF might make it easy.
But remember, just
because you can,
Doesn't mean you should.
Right. I also want to show
you the CICS Flex Viewer.
Here you get a view of the
coupling facility structures,
and you can get info and
perform actions on them,
and this is great.
I wish this were
around when I first
started working on
z/OS systems because
even if I knew something
was acting a little weird
with regard to a coupling
facility structure,
I'd still have to look up all of
the commands to get that info,
and even if I knew exactly
what I wanted to do,
I'd still have to
look up the commands
to do things like
rebuild the structure,
and what's really nice about
this is you can very easily go up
two commands log and find out
what the command equivalent
of what you did is,
so you don't lose out on that.
Now to run z/OSMF,
you need Java, OMVS,
COM Server, and
an external security managers.
Something like backref.
You need the right
compatible versions
and they need to be set up right,
preferably before you try and
start configuring z/OSMF.
I'll also say that you can use
z/OSMF to get to
a terminal or to use ISPF.
But if you're using z/OSMF
just to go right back to
doing things the old way,
you're missing out on
a lot of potential here.
That is z/OSMF in a nutshell.
There's plenty more
to explore in it.
But definitely check this
out because as time goes on,
you'll see more
and more tools and
capabilities being made
available through it.